---
layout: page
title: About Me
permalink: /About_me/
---

College truly was a unique experience; primarily due to its unique capacity to shape a person’s values and beliefs, inherently, influencing every-decision made from that moment on. In the month of May 2022, I became a University of Miami Alumni. After four years of college, I graduated with majors in both Psychology and Spanish, with minors in Philosophy and Ecosystem’s Science and Policy. Through my previous research experience, and specialized undergraduate course load, I have broadened my understanding of ideas relating to immigration, feminism, evidence-based therapies, statistics, research methods, and mark-up languages. For the past two years I have worked with Dr. Amishi Jha as an Undergraduate Research Assistant in the Jha Lab, which focuses on the effects of Mindfulness Training on attention, working memory, and emotion regulation. My primary responsibilities in the laboratory include, coding questionnaires, data entry and cleaning, data analysis via Excel and IBM SPSS, as well as completing other administrative duties. To attain further research experience, I applied and received funding from the PRIME Summer Research Scholarship. My independent study investigated the effects of Mindfulness Training on high-stress professionals. Through this project, I attained a comprehensive understanding of the research process by conducting an extensive literature review to formulate an appropriate hypothesis; compiling, cleaning, and organizing large participant data sets; analyzing data via SPSS by running multi-level linear mixed models and Pearson correlations; and interpreting and preparing the results for a poster presentation at the end of the program. After the poster presentation, I continued working on the project and significantly contributed to the writing of the manuscript. 

Although most of my knowledge is derived from my academic and research experience, I have also gained perspective from my community service. For the past several years, I have been the branch president of a non-profit organization in the Dominican Republic. I was motivated to open this branch after being continually exposed to starving families in low-income communities. Consequently, year- round, I lead the non-profit organization in raising money to provide low-income families with food during the holidays. Furthermore, armed with the knowledge that I am a fortunate member of my Hispanic community; I dedicated six hours per week to tutoring in a bilingual elementary school. I was not only able to help children improve their language skills, but I also gained the oppportunity to build strong connections, and offer emotional support when appropiate. 

I am now quite excited to begin the next phase of my life both as an individual and as a research in developmenet. This page aims to demonstrate these achievements and mile stones in my career, as early as undergraduate research. 

