---
layout: post
title: "The Exploration of Gender-Development"
date: 2022-05-09
author: Cindy Ripoll-Martinez 
---

### Introduction

<br> Gendered personalities and their conformity to the traditional gender roles imposed by society may be the cause of the persistent inequality between males and females. Thus, feminist theorists have embarked on an investigative conquest to identify and address the foundational framework responsible for misogynistic ideologies and sexist practices. In the book, The Reproduction of Mothering: Psychoanalysis and the Sociology of Gender, Nancy Chodorow aims to provide a psychoanalytic analysis of the continuous generational reinforcement of the aforementioned; specifically, the notion that a woman’s sole purpose is to birth and care for children and how this notion permeates the workforce. Chodorow utilizes Freudian principles to critically assess how this phenomenon re-establishes itself generationally due to the subliminal ideologies, values, and perspectives internalized by children. ***The aim of this discussion is to provide an interactive analysis of “The Sexual Sociology of Adult Life”, Chapter 11 of Chodorow’s book, and to provide scientific evidence that potentially invalidates her central argument.*** The structure of the analysis is as follows: (1) a brief overview of the content in this chapter, (2) supportive evidence that may diminish the credibility of the psychoanalytic framework, and (3) a thought experiment that reverses parental roles. 

<br> Chodorow’s central argument in the chapter is that both female and male children develop in particular ways due to a women’s role in the traditional family household which results in ideologies that idealize masculinity and, consequently, mobilize gender-based oppression. These alleged outcomes are caused by the differentiated forms of identification that are internalized as a consequence of the mother being the primary caretaker. Due to the capacity in which the child is able to identify with the mother, children inevitably inherit the traditional roles of male and female perceived in society, thus, resulting in the strong association between women and mothering within all sectors of society.   She further elaborates on the distinction between female and male development: according to her inference, derived from psychoanalytic Freudian theory, the male child undergoes a more challenging developing of the self, given that the most present role model in his life is a female with whom he cannot fully identify with. Due to the lack of a role model in his life, the male child can only experience positional identification in which he only identifies with the traits and values of external male models (this does not imply that he will then internalize them). Furthermore, these male attributes are often idealized by the mother: this is the foundational ideology that idealizes men in society, and in turn, devalues women.  Female children, on the other hand, immediately self-identify with the mother and inherit the responsibilities and assumed societal value of mothers within and outside of the household.  This style of development, caused by mothering, has two main effects in society: (1) a males complete rejection of behaviors and traits associated with women, thus, the familial role, and (2) the female’s deep rooted identification with the mother. These outcomes result in the strong societal recognition of women as wives and mothers, and men as workers and ‘breadwinners.’  

<br> Although Chodorow’s recognition of the traditional male and female role is precise, there are other theories, such as biological, social learning, and cognitive, that have presented sufficient evidence to weaken the validity of the Freudian psychoanalytic framework as the sole explanation for gendered behavior. For example, the cognitive-developmental theory suggests that although children are aware of their own gender by the age of two, and they exhibit behaviors that strictly adhere to gender roles by the age of three or four, these behaviors are a result of the cognitive capacity or limitation of the children. At a young age, children rely heavily on categorical processes to understand themselves and the world around them, thus, they are unable to recognize that gender expression is more fluid and prone to vary across individuals. The cognitive developmental theory contributes to the findings of the psychoanalytic theories in terms of understanding why a child’s gender role is so rigid during the phallic stage where an onset of the oedipal complex is observed. According to the cognitive gender development model, the stages can be more accurately defined as: [1] phase of learning gender related characteristics (pre-school years), [2] categorical understanding (ages five to seven), and [3] phase of relative flexibility (ongoing).    A more detailed explanation of the ongoing construction of gender is offered by McHale, Crouter & Whiteman. The study conducted in 2003 examines the role of family in gender development. The central argument of the study is that previous investigations that have focused on gender development place a sole focus on the role of parents. One of these previously examined frameworks is the psychoanalytic perspective that was explored by Chodorow (i.e., children’s distinct relationship between the father and mother inevitably lead to the internalization of traditional gender roles). Subsequently, the study focused on the evaluation of a more multidimensional perspective: the social learning theory. In contradiction to the psychoanalytic theory, the social learning theory better accounts for the findings of the cognitive-developmental theory, as well as the confounding variables that may influence gender development: (1) parents’ interactional role, (2) parents’ role as instructor and opportunity provider, (3) marriage relationships, and (4) sibling’s role. The study essentially provides evidence for the gender intensification hypothesis which states that “sex-typed socialization should be most evident during or after puberty, when secondary sexual characteristics emerge, and adult roles are imminent.” In support of this hypothesis, researchers have concluded that gender identification is an ongoing construction influenced by parents’ ideologies and cultural norms that have the potential to be projected as gender-typed treatment toward the children (i.e., differentiated forms of organization, punishment, and encouragement of part-taking in gendered activities), the parent’s marital relationship (i.e., whether it is most closely related to traditional or more progressive familial roles), and sibling relationships of either gender (i.e., relationships siblings have, and the relationship a parent has with the sibling).  

<br> Herein, three gender-development theories have been elaborated on: psychoanalytic, cognitive, and social learning.  As Chodorow argued, gender development is dependent on children’s capacity to self-identify with the mother which, in turn, leads to the male child’s rejection of feminine traits (oedipal complex) and the idealization of masculinity. The rejection of feminine traits in the son, as well as the self-identification of the female child with the mother, promotes the gendered-oppressed patriarchal society. Although children’s rigid expression of gendered roles supports this theory, the cognitive developmental theory proposes that rigid gender-typed expression can be attributed to cognitive limitations. Thus, the psychoanalytic framework may offer an explanation solely for the first two stages of gender-development, whereas gender identification and understanding becomes more fluid and flexible at the third stage. Furthermore, the social learning theory expands on the prior through the gender intensification hypothesis which suggest that gender is an ongoing construction that is influenced by many variables both inside and outside the home. 
To further evaluate Chodorow’s argument, herein assume that the traditional family structure is reversed. In order to explore this thought-experiment, strict parameters must be established. First and foremost, the variable in question must be examined independently, thus, the only factor being modified is men’s and women’s role in the family and in the workplace. Second, it can also be assumed that the representation of women in the media has also been reversed (i.e., women are illustrated in films and tv shows in the labor force rather than the home). Nonetheless, this switch does not assume that men will acquire the traits associated with women (i.e., vulnerability, nurturer, affective) and vice versa. This switch simply states that, in this moment in time, all mothers are now financially responsible for the family and considered to be the “breadwinners”- a trait historically associated with the father. If Chodorow’s argument is applied, this reversal of roles would in turn mean that the daughter’s gender-development will be more challenging given that the mother figure is not an active parental figure in the household. Additionally, a woman will be more strongly associated with occupational terms rather than motherly traits. Following Chodorow’s logic, this switch of parental roles should- in principle- lead to the idealization of women due to her absence in the household. Nonetheless, women that currently deviate from the traditional family role are often reprimanded given that women are expected to work as hard as a man, but never at the expense of their children. The present-day negative feedback that untraditional working women receive may reveal that this new association of parents and their roles does not address the fundamental issue: the belief that women’s bodies are biologically designed to give birth. This fundamental misconception is one of the primary reasons why transgender women are not considered to be ‘real’ women: they are biologically unable to continue the human race. The overwhelming rejection of accepting transgender women as ‘real’ women is supportive evidence for the deeply rooted societal understanding that gender is solely an expression of sex. Consequently, women are valued for their biological contributions whereas men are valued for their societal contributions. It can then be inferred that a father becoming the caretaker would still be perceived as a societal contribution. The isolated switching of these roles is not capable of debunking these pre-conceived gender-sex associations that initially led to women’s placement within the household. The inquiry should in turn focus on why women alone are valued for giving birth given that men also contribute to this process. 

<br> It should also be noted that according to the social learning theory, gender development is highly influenced by external factors. One of the parameters established for this hypothetical society was that women would be accurately represented in the media as ‘breadwinners.’ As previously mentioned, this hypothetical representation may lead to the describing of women with more occupational terms that young women would then internalize. However, there is an entirely different issue that is left unaddressed by both Chodorow and the thought-experiment: the objectification of women that primarily fuels violence against women, or better said, rape culture. The objectification and/or sexualization of women’s bodies has various manifestations that continue to exacerbate gender-based oppression. In fact, the conservation and continued growth of the present capitalist economy depends on this sexualization. There are a multitude of multi-million-dollar corporations that solely focus on women’s products and services such as weight-loss programs, make-up, clothing- specifically lingerie and under garments, haircare, face-care, etc. The most appalling market that provides evidence for the exploitation of women is rooted in rape culture. Rather than addressing this heinous issue, companies have instead made nail polish that changes color when a drink has been lazed, jewelry with a button that alerts the police, knifes disguised as pens, pepper spray that resembles perfume, tasers that look like lipstick, and many more. In terms of external influential factors, a young woman is immediately overwhelmed by these products and services that condition them to behave and appear as a women should according to society’s standards. Women are to be confident in their bodies- only with the help of beauty products- yet fearful due to the unwanted attention it attracts. Gender-based oppression is evidently a complex issue with various causes and manifestations; the complexity of the issue is the result of interacting systems or avenues that fuel the oppression of women. 


### Conclusion

<br>In conclusion, Chodorow’s argument proves to be an insufficient explanation for the development of gender as well as the societal roles and expectations of women and men. This claim is supported by both the cognitive developmental theory which suggests that gender-development is an ongoing construct, and by the social learning theory that provides evidence for the variety of confounding variables that influences gender-identification across these stages of development. Finally, a thought-experiment was explored in which the role of men and women in the family and in the workforce was reversed. Regardless of the slight changes in societal perception toward men and women, it was concluded that the fundamental root of the issue would persist. So long as gender is perceived as the expression of sex, a women will always be valued for her biological capability of giving birth. Additionally, there are various external factors that continue to condition men and women in ways that enable or promote gender-based oppression.

<br>

# Work Cited 
1. Knafo, A. & Iervolino, A.C. & Plomin, R. “Masculine Girls and Feminine Boys: Genetic and 
Environmental Contributions to Atypical Gender Development in Early Childhood.” *Journal of Personality and Social Psychology*, vol. 88, no. 3, 2005, 400-412. https://doi.org/10.1037/0022-3514.88.2.400. 
2. McHale, S.M., Crouter, A.C. & Whiteman, S.D. “The Family Contexts of Gender Development 
in Childhood and Adolescence.” *Social Development*, vol. 12, no. 1, 2003, pp. 124-148. https://doi.org/10.1111/1467-9507.00225.
3. Nancy Chodorow, “The Sexual Sociology of Adult Life,” in *The Reproduction of Mothering: Psychoanalysis and the Sociology of Gender*, (Berkley, University of California, 1979): 173-190.
4. Trautner, H.S, Ruble, D.N., Cyphers, L., Kristen, B., Behrendt, R. & Hartmann, P. “Rigidity and 
Flexibility of Gender stereotypes in Childhood: Developmental or Differential?” *Infant and Child Development*, vol. 14, 2005, pp. 365-381. 
